feat: `set-metadata` promo step, deprecate two-arg `freightMetadata` format, add `stageMetadata` handling (#4861)
akuity/kargo: docs/docs/50-user-guide/60-reference-docs/30-promotion-steps/set-metadata.md

---
sidebar_label: set-metadata
description: Updates metadata on Stage or Freight resources during the promotion process.
---

# `set-metadata`

`set-metadata` updates metadata on `Stage` or `Freight` resources during the

> promotion process. This step allows you to attach arbitrary key-value pairs to the

Reviewer: Nit: I think this is the more conventional way to denote key/value:

```suggestion
promotion process. This step allows you to attach arbitrary key/value pairs to the
```

Reviewer: I found "key-value" in a lot of spots, but probably missed some. Please be on the lookout for it.

> status of these resources, which can be useful for tracking deployment information,

Reviewer: Reword this somehow, please to not use the word "deployment." Kargo does not deploy.

```suggestion
status of these resources, which can be useful for tracking deployment information,
```

| ------------------ | ---------- | -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `updates`          | `[]object` | Y        | List of metadata updates to apply to various resources.                                                                                                                                                      |
| `updates[].kind`   | `string`   | Y        | Kind of resource to update metadata for. Must be either "`Stage`" or "`Freight`".                                                                                                                            |
| `updates[].name`   | `string`   | Y        | Name of the resource to update metadata for.                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | `updates[].values` | `object`   | Y        | Key-value pairs to set as metadata on the resource. Must contain at least one key-value pair. This field supports various types of values including strings, numbers, booleans, arrays, and nested objects. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `updates[].values` | `object`   | Y        | Key/value pairs to set as metadata on the resource. Must contain at least one key/value pair. This field supports various types of values including strings, numbers, booleans, arrays, and nested objects. |
```

## Examples

### Common Usage

In this example, metadata is added to both a `Stage` and a `Freight` resource. This

> pattern is commonly used to track deployment information or add context about the

Reviewer: Don't say "deployment."

```suggestion
pattern is commonly used to track deployment information or add context about the
```

promotion process.

```yaml
steps:
  - uses: set-metadata
    config:
      updates:
        - kind: Stage
          name: production
          values:
            deployedBy: "user@example.com"
            version: "1.0.0"
        - kind: Freight
          name: my-app-freight
          values:
            deployed: true
            deploymentStatus: "success"
```

### Complex Metadata

This example demonstrates setting more complex metadata structures, including nested
objects and arrays:

```yaml

> steps:
>   - uses: set-metadata
>     config:
>       updates:
>         - kind: Stage
>           name: staging
>           values:
>             deployment:
>               timestamp: "xyz"
>               components:
>                 - name: "frontend"
>                   version: "2.1.0"
>                   status: "healthy"
>                 - name: "backend"
>                   version: "1.5.0"
>                   status: "healthy"
>             environment:
>               region: "us-west-2"
>               cluster: "staging-01"

Reviewer: Reminder that we've standardized on this syntax throughout the code and docs:

```suggestion
steps:
- uses: set-metadata
  config:
    updates:
    - kind: Stage
      name: staging
      values:
        deployment:
          timestamp: "xyz"
          components:
            - name: "frontend"
              version: "2.1.0"
              status: "healthy"
            - name: "backend"
              version: "1.5.0"
              status: "healthy"
        environment:
          region: "us-west-2"
          cluster: "staging-01"
```

```

### Using Metadata in Other Contexts

> Once metadata is set (as shown in the examples above), it can be retrieved using
> [`freightMetadata()`](../40-expressions.md#freightmetadatafreightname) and
> [`stageMetadata()`](../40-expressions.md#stagemetadatastagename) expressions in other
> steps or verification processes. To access the metadata in different contexts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once metadata is set (as shown in the examples above), it can be retrieved using
[`freightMetadata()`](../40-expressions.md#freightmetadatafreightname) and
[`stageMetadata()`](../40-expressions.md#stagemetadatastagename) functions
available within expressions used in other steps or in verification processes.
```
